Add blogpost on mpox preparedness (#285)
epiverse-trace/epiverse-trace.github.io: posts/mpox-preparedness/index.qmd

---

> title: "2024 mpox outbreak: common analytics scenarios and available R tools"

Reviewer: mpox is now the WHO-agreed name, so would suggest using this for consistency with [media reports etc](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/articles/c2vv0pgggqzo)

author:
  - name: "James Azam"
    orcid: "0000-0001-5782-7330"
    author:
  - name: "Adam Kucharski"
    orcid: "0000-0001-8814-9421"
date: "2024-06-19"
categories: [R, Epiverse-TRACE, mpox, outbreak, outbreak-analytics]
bibliography: index.bib
format:
  html: 
    toc: true
---

> There is an ongoing outbreak of mpox globally and countries are on the high alert. Various analyses of the impact of the outbreak at country level are emerging. The US CDC for example has analysed the potential size of outbreaks resulting from transmission within and between households [^1] and the risk of Clade 1 mpox outbreaks among some key populations associated with key transmission routes [^2]. However, the ongoing outbreak will require a coordinated response from the global health community.

Reviewer: I made an edit here – not sure if it's got lost? https://github.com/epiverse-trace/epiverse-trace.github.io/pull/285/commits/7f5aae6fe2ff35e572e0c583e64c1defd130b173#r1648476566

> There is an ongoing outbreak of mpox globally and countries are on the high alert. Various analyses of the impact of the outbreak at country level are emerging. The US CDC for example has analysed the potential size of outbreaks resulting from transmission within and between households [^1] and the risk of Clade 1 mpox outbreaks among some key populations associated with key transmission routes [^2]. However, the ongoing outbreak will require a coordinated response from the global health community.

Author: Sorry, Adam. I may have overwritten it at some point. I've added some more burden context here 20ead11c351eb1cc21ba5e1caf94dc8173faa4e7 and why we should care here c7eba828979f1bb4889e395198cd27febc9870b7.

### Estimating transmission potential

::: {.callout .callout-info}
A key initial question during emerging outbreaks is the transmission potential of the disease. This is typically quantified using parameters such as: the basic reproduction number, $R0$; the time varying reproduction number, $Rt$; and $k$, which captures individual heterogeneity in transmission (i.e. "superspreading" potential). These quantities are useful to assess the potential for further spread of the disease and the impact of interventions.
:::

#### Population level ($R0$ and $Rt$)

The basic reproduction number, $R0$, is the average number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual in a completely susceptible population. The instantaneous reproduction number, $Rt$, on the other hand, is the average number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual at time $t$ in a partially susceptible population. The instantaneous reproduction number is a more useful quantity during an outbreak as it accounts for the impact of interventions and changes in population immunity.

> If data is available on the daily number of reported cases, [`{EpiNow2}`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/) and  [`{EpiEstim}`](https://mrc-ide.github.io/EpiEstim/) can be used to estimate the time varying reproduction number, $Rt$. These packages require data on the time scale of transmission (i.e. the generation time, or the serial interval, which is [commonly used as a proxy](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsif.2020.0756) for this). While [`{EpiEstim}`] focuses on retrospective estimation of $Rt$, `{EpiNow2}` is designed for both retrospective and real-time estimation.

Author: ```suggestion
If data is available on the daily number of reported cases, [`{EpiNow2}`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/) and  [`{EpiEstim}`](https://mrc-ide.github.io/EpiEstim/) can be used to estimate the time varying reproduction number, $Rt$. These packages require data on the time scale of transmission (i.e. the generation time, or the serial interval, which is [commonly used as a proxy](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsif.2020.0756) for this). While [`{EpiEstim}`] on retrospective estimation of $Rt$, `{EpiNow2}` is designed for both retrospective and real-time estimation.
```

> If data is available on the daily number of reported cases, [`{EpiNow2}`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/) and  [`{EpiEstim}`](https://mrc-ide.github.io/EpiEstim/) can be used to estimate the time varying reproduction number, $Rt$. These packages require data on the time scale of transmission (i.e. the generation time, or the serial interval, which is [commonly used as a proxy](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsif.2020.0756) for this). While [`{EpiEstim}`] focuses on retrospective estimation of $Rt$, `{EpiNow2}` is designed for both retrospective and real-time estimation.

Author: ```suggestion
If data is available on the daily number of reported cases, [`{EpiNow2}`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/) and  [`{EpiEstim}`](https://mrc-ide.github.io/EpiEstim/) can be used to estimate the time varying reproduction number, $Rt$. These packages require data on the time scale of transmission (i.e. the generation time, or the serial interval, which is [commonly used as a proxy](https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rsif.2020.0756) for this). While [`{EpiEstim}`] focuses on retrospective estimation of $Rt$, `{EpiNow2}` is designed for both retrospective and real-time.
```

In estimating $Rt$, one practical consideration is the impact of various delays (biological and reporting) on the estimates [@charniga2024best;@park2024estimating;@gostic2020practical]. `{EpiNow2}` adjusts for these delays in various ways. For example, it accounts for the symptom onset and reporting delays by taking the incubation period and reporting delay as inputs. Moreover, `{EpiNow2}` can estimate estimate the reporting delay from the data if data on incidence by date of onset and report are available.

Furthermore, dedicated packages have emerged for estimating epidemiological delays from data using best practices. [`{epidist}`](https://epidist.epinowcast.org/articles/epidist.html) offers the ability to estimate delay distributions, accounting for issues such as truncation (i.e., not all disease outcomes will yet be known in real-time).

> If delay data are not available, published estimates of the incubation period and serial interval can be used. The [`{epiparameter}`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epiparameter/) package collates a database of epidemiological distributions from the literature and provides functions for interacting with the database. See the [database here](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epiparameter/dev/articles/database) for currently available parameters (more entries are planned). Additionally, if only summary statistics are available (e.g. range and median), `{epiparameter}` can be used to extract the distribution parameters.

Reviewer 2: Ths epiparameter database link will likely need to be updated after https://github.com/epiverse-trace/epiparameter/issues/336.

Author: It still works as it doesn't use the .dev domain.

### Forecasting and nowcasting infection dynamics

::: {.callout .callout-info}
Forecasting and nowcasting of infections are crucial for planning and resource allocation during an outbreak. Forecasting is the prediction of future cases, deaths, or other outcomes, while nowcasting is the prediction of the current outbreak situation. These predictions can help public health authorities to anticipate the trajectory of the outbreak and to implement timely interventions.
:::

[`{EpiNow2}`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/) and [`{epinowcast}`](https://package.epinowcast.org/) provide functions to forecast and nowcast the number of cases. The data required for `{EpiNow2}` have already been described in the previous section. The `{epinowcast}` package similarly requires data on the number of cases reported per date. `{epinowcast}` does not currently support forecasting but there are plans to add this functionality in future versions.

### Estimating disease severity

::: {.callout .callout-info}

> The case fatality ratio (CFR) is often used to assess the severity of a disease. CFR here refers to the proportion of deaths among confirmed cases.

Author: ```suggestion
The case ratio (CFR) is often used to assess the severity of a disease. CFR here refers to the proportion of deaths among confirmed cases.
```

Here again, `{EpiNow2}` can be used to estimate the time-varying case fatality ratio using the same data as for the reproduction number. `{EpiNow2}` can estimate other severity metrics, such as the case hospitalisation ratio, given data on cases and hospitalisations, and the hospitalisation fatality ratio, if data on hospitalisations and associated deaths are available.

### Assessing the impact of interventions

::: {.callout .callout-info}
mpox can be mitigated with behaviour change, treatment, and vaccination. Here, a few tools are available to assess the impact of intervention scenarios.
:::

[`{epidemics}`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/) provides ready compartmental models to estimate the impact of vaccination and non-pharmaceutical interventions like behaviour change, which can conceptually be modelled as a reduction in the transmission rate through changes in the population contact structure.

> If we want to explore population-level outbreak dynamics, `{epidemics}` allows for stratifying the population into arbitrary groups, specifying the contact structure between these groups, and rates of interventions. The data required to run these models include: population structure, contact structure, and timing and magnitude of interventions.

Reviewer 2: finalsize can also be used for basic scenario modelling. Should it be added here as well?

Reviewer: Think we should be careful about suggesting {finalsize} for scenarios given limited transmissibility of mpox in general population (as `finalsize()` will return outbreak size = 0 if R0<1). But the `r_eff()` function could be useful to understand how heterogenity in contacts influences $R$ in subpopulations (like the Endo et al Science paper)

Author: I think I'll leave it out.

---
title: "2024 mpox outbreak: common analytics tasks and available R tools"
author:
  - name: "James Azam"
    orcid: "0000-0001-5782-7330"
  - name: "Hugo Gruson"
    orcid: "0000-0002-4094-147"
  - name: "Adam Kucharski"
    orcid: "0000-0001-8814-9421"
date: "2024-01-04"

> categories: [R, Epiverse-TRACE, mpox, outbreak, outbreak-analytics, DOI]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
categories: [Epiverse-TRACE, mpox, outbreak, outbreak-analytics, DOI]
```

This is not a good fit for R-bloggers based on their guidelines. Once this is committed, I can merge the post today.

bibliography: index.bib
format:
  html: 
    toc: true
---

> There is an ongoing outbreak of mpox globally and countries are on the high alert. The Democratic Republic of Congo is so far the worst hit with a total of 7, 851 cases and 384 deaths between January 1 and May 26, 2024 [^1]. Before 2022, there were no reports of sustained mpox outbreaks in most countries of the world. However, within 1 year (Jan 1, 2022, and Jan 29, 2023), 110 countries in all six WHO Regions had reported a total of 85, 473 confirmed cases and 89 deaths [@laurenson2023description].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are ongoing outbreaks of mpox globally. The Democratic Republic of Congo is so far the worst hit with a total of 7,851 cases and 384 deaths reported between January 1 and May 26, 2024 [^1]. Before 2022, there were few reports of sustained mpox transmission globally. However, during the following year (Jan 1, 2022, and Jan 29, 2023), 110 countries in all six WHO Regions had reported a total of 85,473 confirmed cases and 89 deaths between them [@laurenson2023description].
```
I'd refer to 'outbreaks' in each country rather than a single global outbreak.

I don't know if the additional of a space after comma is the linting, but looks strange for numbers.

Author: I agree with your wording.

> Mpox is a highly contagious and severe disease that is transmitted through respiratory droplets and direct contact with infected persons. The disease is characterized by fever, cough, and a rash and has an incubation period between 3 - 34 days, depending on the transmission route [@gessain2022monkeypox]. Infected individuals may experience severe symptoms leading to hospitalisation or death. There are two genetic clades: clade I and clade II, which also has subclades IIa and IIb [@laurenson2023description].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mpox is transmitted through respiratory droplets and direct contact with infected persons. The disease is characterized by fever, cough, and a rash and has an incubation period between 3 - 34 days, depending on the transmission route [@gessain2022monkeypox]. Infected individuals may experience severe symptoms leading to hospitalisation or death. There are two genetic clades: clade I and clade II, which also has subclades IIa and IIb [@laurenson2023description].
```
I don't think there's evidence it's 'highly contagious' (R is below 1 in general population)? I'd either give the severity estimate (e.g. https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.04.23.24306209v1) or cut.

For incubation period, I'd suggest using the Ward estimate (https://www.bmj.com/content/379/bmj-2022-073153) rather than the range quoted in a review.

Author: I'm now using the incubation period from the Ward paper in b91aa593cfc3dc034aa337083653682d252a9efd.

> Various analyses of the impact of the outbreak at country level are emerging. The US CDC for example has analysed the potential size of outbreaks resulting from transmission within and between households [^2] and the risk of Clade 1 mpox outbreaks among some key populations associated with key transmission routes [^3]. However, the ongoing outbreak will require a coordinated response from the global health community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Several analyses of the potential impact of outbreaks at country level have already emerged in 2024. The US CDC, for example, has analysed the potential size of outbreaks resulting from transmission within and between households [^2] and the risk of Clade 1 mpox outbreaks among some key populations associated with key transmission routes [^3]. However, tackling ongoing outbreaks around the world will require a coordinated response from the global health community.
```
Might be worth including this one too (which uses the vimes package): https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10919191/

Or just cutting this paragraph for now, to avoid it needing to be more comprehensive review of what's been done.

Author: Mmmhhh I think there's value in leaving it in to build up on the broader context of the article. I'll add in a sentence with the linked analysis.

Author: I've added the update here 85b9ed560ecdedc5c1bcc1a550e5b1d1728d3828.

> The Epiverse-TRACE team is developing a set of tools to help provide analytics support to decision-makers during this outbreak. This post provides an overview of aspects of analytics that could support decision-making in the context of the ongoing outbreak of mpox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Epiverse-TRACE team is developing a set of analytical tools that could help support to decision-makers during mpox outbreaks. This post provides an overview of the tasks that such tools be applied to.
```
Have edited so it doesn't sound the tools were developed specifically for these outbreaks, and to avoid repetition.

## Common outbreak analytics tasks

Outbreak analytics in the context of the ongoing mpox outbreak involves several tasks that can be handled by existing and emerging R tools. Some of the tasks include estimating the transmission potential, forecasting infection dynamics, estimating severity, and assessing the impact of interventions.

Here, we briefly describe some common tasks, data required, and the ready R tools/packages developed by the Epiverse-TRACE team and the wider community.

### Cleaning and validating data

::: {.callout .callout-info}
Data cleaning is often the first task in outbreak analytics. This usually involves identifying and correcting errors in the data, standardizing the format of key variables, and ensuring that the data is in a format that is fit for analysis. Data validation is also important to ensure that the data is accurate.
:::

> [`{cleanepi}`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/cleanepi/)} is useful for cleaning individual-level datasets, and [`{listlist}`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/linelist/)} can be used to tag and validate key variables in datasets that might change over time. The [`{numberize}`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/numberize/) package can also be used to convert numbers written as text. It currently has functionality for English, Spanish, and French.

Reviewer: Watch out for double }

### Estimating transmission potential

::: {.callout .callout-info}
A key initial question during emerging outbreaks is the transmission potential of the disease. This is typically quantified using parameters such as: the basic reproduction number, $R0$; the time varying reproduction number, $Rt$; and $k$, which captures individual heterogeneity in transmission (i.e. "superspreading" potential). These quantities are useful to assess the potential for further spread of the disease and the impact of interventions.
:::

#### Population-level transmissibility ($R0$ and $Rt$)

> The basic reproduction number, $R0$, is the average number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual in a completely susceptible population. The instantaneous reproduction number, $Rt$, on the other hand, is the average number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual at time $t$ in a partially susceptible population. The instantaneous reproduction number is a more useful quantity during an outbreak as it accounts for the impact of interventions and changes in population immunity.

Reviewer: Above $R_t$ is called the time varying reproduction number - suggest edit for consistency.

> The basic reproduction number, $R0$, is the average number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual in a completely susceptible population. The instantaneous reproduction number, $Rt$, on the other hand, is the average number of secondary cases produced by a single infected individual at time $t$ in a partially susceptible population. The instantaneous reproduction number is a more useful quantity during an outbreak as it accounts for the impact of interventions and changes in population immunity.

Reviewer: Use subscripts for $R_0$ and $R_t$? Looks a bit strange otherwise

### Forecasting and nowcasting infection dynamics

::: {.callout .callout-info}
Forecasting and nowcasting of infections are crucial for planning and resource allocation during an outbreak. Forecasting is the prediction of future cases, deaths, or other outcomes, while nowcasting is the prediction of the current outbreak situation. These predictions can help public health authorities to anticipate the trajectory of the outbreak and to implement timely interventions.
:::

[`{EpiNow2}`](https://epiforecasts.io/EpiNow2/) and [`{epinowcast}`](https://package.epinowcast.org/) provide functions to forecast and nowcast the number of cases. The data required for `{EpiNow2}` have already been described in the previous section. The `{epinowcast}` package similarly requires data on the number of cases reported per date. `{epinowcast}` does not currently support forecasting but there are plans to add this functionality in future versions.

### Estimating disease severity

::: {.callout .callout-info}

> The case fatality ratio (CFR) is often used to assess the severity of a disease. CFR here refers to the proportion of deaths among confirmed cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The case fatality risk (CFR) is often used to assess the severity of a disease. CFR here refers to the proportion of deaths among confirmed cases.
```
Edited for consistency with {cfr} package

### Assessing the impact of interventions

::: {.callout .callout-info}
mpox can be mitigated with behaviour change, treatment, and vaccination. Here, a few tools are available to assess the impact of intervention scenarios.
:::

[`{epidemics}`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/) provides ready compartmental models to estimate the impact of vaccination and non-pharmaceutical interventions like behaviour change, which can conceptually be modelled as a reduction in the transmission rate through changes in the population contact structure.

If we want to explore population-level outbreak dynamics, `{epidemics}` allows for stratifying the population into arbitrary groups, specifying the contact structure between these groups, and rates of interventions. The data required to run these models include: population structure, contact structure, and timing and magnitude of interventions. Data on social contact matrices can be obtained from the [`{socialmixr}`](https://github.com/epiforecasts/socialmixr) package.

## Summary

> In this post, we have outlined common outbreak analytics tasks relevant to the mpox outbreak, the data required, and R packages/tools that are currently available to facilitate these tasks. The tools described here are developed by the Epiverse-TRACE team and the wider community, following high standards of research software development, and validation from modellers, health professionals, and the user community. The tools are designed to be user-friendly and accessible to a wide range of stakeholders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we have outlined common outbreak analytics tasks relevant to the mpox outbreak, the data required, and R packages/tools that are currently available to facilitate these tasks. The tools described here are being developed by the Epiverse-TRACE team and the wider community, with the aim of ensuring high standards of research software development, and validation from end users, including epidemiologists, clinicians, and policy makers. The tools are designed to be user-friendly and well integrated, enabling one analysis task to easily feed into another. We [would therefore be keen to hear](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/get-involved.html) from other groups interested in potentially collaborating or contributing on this growing ecosystem of tools.
```
Worth also including a call to action I think (added suggestion).

---

> title: "Epiverse-TRACE tools for analysing ongoing Mpox outbreak"

Author: Thanks. I've fixed it here 043822e987385602044c3f3a5c17ee3b05f1307b.

> author:

Author: Should probably be Epiverse-TRACE team.

Reviewer 3: If we want this to be authored by the Epiverse-TRACE team, I imagine we need a different review process. Are you sure you want a collective author for this, and not have it be your blog post?

Author: Tagging @adamkucharski and @sbfnk here for thoughts.  I think this is more about providing an encompassing perspective and maybe a PI OR team article would be better than an individual's blogpost.

Reviewer: Given this came out of a team discussion, think including (or inviting) all who contributed content would make sense, maybe with hard deadline for comments/review. 

And don't think job stage/RSE/academic split on authors matters much (here or elsewhere) – over the years, have seen great outbreak work by ECRs and developers...

Author: I'll incorporate current corrections and send out an open invite on Slack.

  - name: "James Azam"
    orcid: "0000-0001-5782-7330"

> date: "2024-06-19"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
date: "2024-07-01"
```

We are trying to pace our blog posts a bit more, and already have one scheduled for June 24th. Suggested date as we've been adding them on Monday mostly for now (no reason why Monday, just to have something).

Reviewer: Don't think we should worry too much about staggering posts (don't think we have an e-mail list we're sending to automatically, so no spam risk) – suggest we do whatever is lowest friction/admin and gets finished content out there soonest, given information has high time value during outbreaks.

Author: Yes, I agree this needs to be out asap else it'll become untimely.

> date: "last-modified"

Author: Fixed in 025b2566ebeb199f3e400a107e70e6dfd8756770

### Disease severity (CFR)

The case fatality rate is a key metric to assess the severity of a disease. The case fatality rate is the proportion of deaths among confirmed cases.

With data on the number of cases reported and the number of deaths reported, the [cfr](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/cfr/) package can be used to estimate the case fatality rate and its uncertainty. Importantly, it accounts for the delay between the onset of symptoms and death, which is crucial for accurate estimation of the case fatality rate.

### The impact of interventions

Mpox can be mitigated with behaviour change, treatment, and vaccination. Here, a few tools are available to assess the impact of intervention scenarios.

The [epidemics](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epidemics/) package provides ready compartmental models to estimate the impact of vaccination and non-pharmaceutical interventions like behaviour change, which can conceptually be modelled as a reduction in the transmission rate through changes in the population contact structure.

> `{epidemics}` allows for stratifying the population structure into arbitrary groups, specifying the contact structure between these groups, and rates of interventions. Hence, the data required to inform these models are the population structure, contact structure, and the rates of interventions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to explore population-level outbreak dynamics, `{epidemics}` allows for stratifying the population into arbitrary groups, specifying the contact structure between these groups, and rates of interventions. The data required to run these models include: population structure, contact structure, and timing and magnitude of interventions.
```

## Summary

> In this post, we have outlined the tools available to support decision-making in the context of the ongoing outbreak of Mpox. These tools are developed by the Epiverse-TRACE team and the wider community and are available as R packages. The tools are designed to be user-friendly and accessible to a wide range of users, from public health professionals to researchers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we have outlined emerging tools available to support decision-making in the context of the ongoing outbreak of mpox. These tools are developed by the Epiverse-TRACE team as well as the wider epidemiological community, and are available as R packages. The tools are designed to be user-friendly and accessible to a wide range of users, from public health professionals to researchers, and we welcome feedback and contributions to help strengthen and expand the range of tasks that can be tackled.
```
